---
postTitle: "Lingering in Amsterdam"
---

It was still dark, but the birds were yapping with lucid fervor. Awake at 4:30 AM and restlessly waiting for the sun, I read for three hours before heading out to hunt for breakfast. It was our first morning in Europe.

It was a cool summer morning when I stepped out to the canal-lined streets of Amsterdam. Tall men in blazers and women in blouses biked past me, peddling with sustained eagerness, slipping past delivery trucks like ice skaters, ascending and descending over canal bridges with ease. The number of bicyclists overwhelmed pedestrians and cars so violently that I resumed the practice I’ve had known at university: I assumed pedestrians had the right of way over bicyclists, and headed for the corner bakery on Haarlemmerdijk street. But my assumption was quickly invalidated. It was obvious that the humble bicyclist, zipping through intersections and corners without pause or concern, owned the road. But it wasn’t outright chaos—there was a method to the madness, and it was decodable through observation.

Of course, every culture in the world has their own protocol, both through written law and pragmatic improvisation. The eight-lane intersections of Saigon, for example, clogged with hundreds of people in scooters weaving in and out, banking sharp around turns, entering roadways without checking for incoming traffic, may seem impassible to a tourist, but an Australian ex-pat helpfully explained it this way: whoever arrives at the piece of land first gets the right of way, thus removing the need to ever look to your left or right, but only to the next patch of concrete ahead of you. This kind of insight was what I aimed to derive on the streets of Amsterdam.

And this is what I found. It was easily derivable as a form of Dutch practicality. Here, you may blaze through the intersection if you have pre-visualized and predicted a path through, because you assume other bicycles around you have also done the same. Thus if everyone follows their visualized path, there is no need to slow down on intersections; it’s only practical to pause around blind ones. As for everyone else—pedestrians, mopeds, cars, trucks—they always assume there’s a bicyclist careening through a corner (because there is always one). The needs of the many, I suppose, outweigh the needs of the few. And it was on these morning walks to the local bakery that I decoded their ways. But on that first morning, I was still uncertain of the protocol when I headed back to our rented room, dodging suspicious bicyclists, with croissants and coffee for Kristina.

We had rented a small room in the Jordaan from an old woman who spoke to us in French. The room seemed like Van Gogh’s *Bedroom in Arles* come to life—it was just as small, with the same coziness and pragmatic simplicity, made cheerful by the warm sunlight, pastel walls, and assorted artworks pinned to the wall.

The woman lived alone, though family photographs hinted at children and a deceased husband. An electric scooter, perhaps her departed husband’s, was parked outside the house, its canvas cover blistered by the harsh Neanderthal seasons. Like most Amsterdam apartments, this house was laid our mostly vertical—steep stairs acted as passageways between rooms. Our room was the last floor, separated by a case of spiraling stairs which we climbed and descended with loud stomping, past her living room and bedroom. The grandmother spent her days watching soaps in her bedroom, or listening to the radio, moving from room to room. Once I peered into her bedroom through a small crack and jumped when I saw her wrinkled face staring back at me, sombre and stern. Another time, in the morning, she was in her panties, nude-colored, turned away.

The Jordaan neighborhood was previously occupied by the working-class, but had gentrified through the decades, and now boasted juice cleanse cafes and clothing boutiques. Like all of central Amsterdam, there are no obvious zoning regulations. Opulent residences share walls with *brown cafes*—old, cozy pubs—filled with plump merry men drinking beer, spilling out into the streets. In lieu of backyards, residents ate dinner on their front steps, among sidewalk gardens, using make-shift tables and blankets for their picnics. Through the windows you can see mothers preparing dinner as children, holding onto birthday balloons and dressed in party attire, watched TV. Life in Amsterdam, it seemed, preferred to be made public.

I also noticed that a lot of what I thought were Indonesian words actually originated from Dutch. *Wartle* for carrot, *kantor* for office. Luckily, the Dutch had gained a taste for her colony’s food, and many Indonesians migrants to the Netherlands had opened restaurants. This I was excited about. We found an Indonesian eatery close by, *Manis*, and ordered dishes that I would not have been able to find in all of America, dishes that reminded me of my childhood. We chatted with the young, pretty lady working the counter. She was born in Indonesia and lived there for nine years before moving to Amsterdam. I told her that, unlike Amsterdam, there aren't a lot of Indonesians in Texas. She suggested that it's maybe because Muslims are afraid of moving there, an allegation I ignored (in fact, Texas receives a large number of Muslim migrants, and we have befriended many in our neighborhood). I asked her how she liked living in Amsterdam.

“Everything here is plausible,” she quipped. Meaning you can do anything you want in Amsterdam, and it’s perfectly acceptable. We started talking about Jakarta, where I had spent my childhood. “I love Jakarta,” she said. “Everything is plausible there.” I didn’t understand this use of *plausible*. “You can get anyone to do anything for you,” she said. “If you don't want to park your car, give it to the attendant. You can hire a driver.”

The woman continued. “You remember Jakarta, how bad it was before. But they cleaned it up.” I mentioned how horrible traffic is there, having been there just last year. “Yes but they are building a metro. New malls. They removed the squatters. Things are moving forward. You should live there!”

I couldn’t wrap my head around how the non-existent metro (which the city has been promising for almost a decade) and a quick clean up of the shantytowns would convince her to move there, let alone me.

It was two weeks later, on an overnight stay to catch a flight, that I finally understood what she had meant. We were back at the eatery for dinner. It was almost ten at night, and were the only diners. A young man hung around—he was courting our waitress, waiting for her to close the shop. “Maybe you can come back later,” she said to him in Indonesian. “I don’t mind waiting,” he replied.

“There’s only two of us here, my mother and I. I have to close up shop.”

“What time?”

“Maybe midnight. You don’t mind waiting?”

“I don’t mind waiting.”

And he sat there, waiting for her as we ordered.

She recognized us, and we told her about our time in France. “I want to go home,” she said, meaning Indonesia. “It’s too cold here.” This seems like an implausible (to use the word) reason. Maybe Amsterdam is dreadful in winter, but no one moves to a completely different culture because of the weather. So I pressed her. “In Indonesia,” she said, “you can do anything.” There it is again, that *everything is plausible*, which still didn’t make sense to me. “Here they don’t talk to each other. You go up to your house, maybe say ‘Hello’, but you don’t know your neighbors. And everything closes so early. You go out with your friends after work and there’s nothing to do. In Jakarta, you can eat dinner at midnight. Everything is open late!”

And finally I understood her. She felt trap in Amsterdam. Even though the city had a large Indonesian population, she still felt out of place. Her upbringing had been culturally Eastern, so the things that *were* open late didn’t apply to her (namely, pubs and *coffeeshops*; alcohol and drugs). And working in her mother’s restaurant every day until late at night, she felt stuck. “He wants to go home too,” she said, waving a hand at the young man. “Don’t you?” He blushed but said nothing.

It’s always odd to consider the reverse migration. The parents had given up and risked everything to move to West, to move forward. But sometimes those children find that the West is lacking, and yearn to go “home” to where they may flourish. This woman felt exactly this. For this young, appealing lady, Jakarta was a land of where all things were *plausible*, where she can run from parental expectations and be unshackled by a culture that, promising freedom and license, imprisoned her. She carried the same contagion of Flaubert, who despised his native homeland of France and yearned for exotic Egypt with her camels and courtesan dancers. It was a romanticization of geography, of the exotic. She, like Flaubert, felt that her true self befitted a land different than her own. She was made to be, it seemed, a traveler.

----

In those lingering Amsterdam days, we visited Anne Frank’s attic, with its damp and windowless rooms, sampled cheese shops, ate crumbly apple pie on the sidewalk, lazily watching boats pass. I found a favorite piece of mine in the Rijksmuseum: Vermeer’s *The Milkmaid*. We biked through Vondelpark in the glow of the afternoon sun. And in the mornings, we visited the same bakery for our croissant and the same coffee shop. Thanks to globalization they have Aeropress coffee (it’s a method of brewing coffee using a pressured plunger-like system) everywhere. I ordered one, with beans from Burundi. The sleepy barista looks at me and asks, “do you know the Aeropress?” It was invented in Oakland.

One afternoon, we were lingering in our coffee shop when a red-faced Dutch blue collared worker stumbled in, wearing a wife beater and jeans plastered with paint. He ordered a coffee, but the barista said, “we don’t accept cash, only credit.”

“What the fuck, for coffee?” the drunk began. “Are you a jew?”

The room waited for the baristas response. He paused, then said something that I can only attribute to the honing of Dutch practicality. "You can pay in cash,” he said methodically, “but we can only provide take out cups.”

“You Jew, you need to come to Jesus,” he slurs. Maybe it was the invocation of Jesus' name, but the man acquiesced. He mumbled something to the long-haired, yuppie barista about being a Jew, paid with coins, and took his coffee. We breath a sigh of relief.

But a minute later the man barged back in. “I want a glass cup,” he yelled in English to a woman barista working the register. He had discovered the clever rouse to get him out of the shop, with the take out cup. I surveyed the room and found three tall, strong Dutch men fixed on their papers. A male barista stepped between the man and the woman. They switched to rapid Dutch while the scene continued, the drunk with spurts of biting words, the barista keeping calm but firm. Eventually he gave a final howl and left.

But the point stuck with me. He was, in appearance and in status, out of place. Unable to produce a credit card, he had lost face and began to make a scene. It’s rare to see people of different economic classes mingle. All around the world, each class live in different parts of town, eat in different restaurants, fellowship at different churches, patronize different bars. Obviously spending ability plays a large part, but the true reason, I feel, is that is that it’s much more comfortable to be with those that are like us. These stratified relationships may produce some kind of peace, but it’s an artificial one, more territorial armistice than than friendship.

These differences became more pronounced and poignant, later on, when we were in South Africa. And it was during our time away that we watched America erupt: shootings of black Americans by police, protests, the murder of police in Dallas and Baton Rouge. Not to mention the terrorist attacks in Paris, Nice and Turkey.

Globalization and technology promised peace and prosperity. Those things did come, and in great quantities. But it was at that coffee shop, with the drunk antisemite, that I saw with fresh eyes the stratification of our world. And I don’t mean an economic one (for too long have we measured each other on primarily on economic means)—I mean a moral one. We prefer comfort over truth, hoarding over generosity, slander over forgiveness. What we need, then, are the the fruits of the Sprit that Paul wrote of two millennia ago, which forever hold true: love, joy, peace, forbearance, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness and self-control. This is the lasting answer.

The great power of travel is to observe here what we would have passed over at home. In the Indonesian eatery I saw a young lady whose home was not, and could not be, where she had lived for most of her life. Assimilation was not impossible for her, but it was unwanted. To embrace the culture was to lose a large part of herself. And in the painter, I saw a man who was Dutch true and true, though perhaps not the sophisticated, secular and upper-middle class Amsterdammer we assumed of. Yet he was more cut-off, more unwanted and excluded, in rags instead of designer jackets, coins instead of credit cards. There was, of course, a third cast-away. Myself. A traveler finds new powers in foreign lands, from the sense of non-belonging. There arises a fearlessness to ask questions, to push boundaries and test ideas, calling upon ignorance as defense. You also find an acute ability to observe and dissect in a way that the native cannot. And coming home, we find that we see clearer than ever.
